
				disk-stress
				-----------

The disk-stress program is used to create intense stress on the kernel,
disk I/O subsystem and mass storage device drivers. It accomplishes this
by presenting a disk work load to the character (raw) devices of disk
drives.

I/O latencies may optionally be collected and analyzed via per disk
histograms.

If writing is enabled, disk-stress must be pointed at devices that are
otherwise unused (e.g. not mounted for a file system, not the system
swap partition, not a raw partition of a database, not a constituent
of a RAID).

The program has six options:

	-n noise-level
		This option allows the user to specify the verbosity level
		of the program. The default level is 0, quiet. The levels
		are as follows:

		0	quiet
		1	show the internal phases and their statuses
		2	output a device summary
		3	log each I/O operation

	-p policy-name

		This option allows the user to adjust the POSIX thread
		scheduling parameter specified for the creation of each
		test thread. If not specified the system specified
		default policy is used. The choices are:

			SCHED_RR
				This selects the round robin scheduling
				policy. This should be the prefered choice
				but be aware that somewhat cryptic errors
				may occur if the user is not effectively
				root.

			SCHED_FIFO
				This selects the first-in-first-out
				scheduling policy.

			SCHED_OTHER
				This selects the "other" policy which
				may or may not be different from the
				system default policy. This is usually
				not a good choice for this program.

		This option will only appear if the POSIX threads
		implementation on the target machine supports thread
		scheduling policy adjustment.

	-r random-number-generator-seed

		This option allows the user to specify the initial seed
		of the random number generator used for random seeking.
		The argument is a signed integer.

	-s stack-size
		This option allows the user to specify the stack size of
		each test thread. This option will only appear if the
		POSIX threads implementation on the target machine supports
		thread stack size adjustment. If the specified size is less
		than the POSIX implementation default size, an error will
		be printed and the minimum size identified. The argument
		is an unsigned integer, specifying the stack size in K-bytes.

	-v
		This option outputs the version information about the program
		and exits.

	-y
		This option allows the user to enable yacc yydebug output.
		It can sometimes be useful in understanding syntax errors
		(and debugging errors in the grammar).

The disk-stress program expects a control file as a command line argument.
The control file is used to specify the disk devices to be tested and the
parameters associated with their testing.

The default testing parameters are:

The default block size is 4096 bytes.
The default starting block number (offset) is 0.
The default test area size will automatically use the entire disk.
The default number of I/O operations per thread is 10000.
The default number of threads (tests) per disk is 1.
The default test access pattern is random.
The default write verification option is disabled.
The default read fraction is 1.0 (no writes).
By default latency data collection is disabled. If enabled:
	The default latency histogram upper bound is 1.0 second.
	The default number of latency hhistogram bins is 1000.


The control file is processed sequentially. A change to a default parameter
will remain in effect until it is changed or end-of-file is encountered.

The testing defaults control statements are:

default-block-size		integer-block-size-bytes

	The default I/O block size is specified. The size may be specified
	in bytes, multiples of a 'K' (e.g. 64k, 22K) or multiples of a 'B'
	(e.g. 32b, 128B). A 'K' is 1024 bytes; a 'B' (block) is 512 blocks.
	If the block size is specified in bytes it must be a multiple of
	512, the "fundamental" block size.

default-read-fraction		floating-point-number

	The default read fraction is specified. A read fraction of 0.0
	specifies all writes. A read fraction of 1.0 specifies all reads.
	A read fraction between 0.0 and 1.0 specifies the statistical
	read fraction.

default-starting-block		integer-block-number

	The default testing area starting block number is specified.

default-test-area-size		integer-block-number

	The default test area size (in blocks) is specified.

default-requests-per-thread	integer-number

	The default number of I/O operations per test thread is specified.

default-threads-per-disk	integer-number

	The default number of test threads per disk is specified.

default-access-pattern		random or sequential

	The default test access pattern is specified.

	If a sequential access pattern is specified and there is more
	than one test thread per disk, the sequential I/O test will start
	each thread at a different (random) place within the test area.

	The sequential access pattern will "wrap around" the test area in
	order to satisfy the number of requests if the number of requests
	is larger than the test area.

default-write-verification	enabled or disabled

	The default write verification state is specified.

	Enabling write verification will slow down the testing process
	(slightly) since the each portion of the test area under test
	must be locked for the duration of the write verification and then
	unlocked. 

default-histogram-upper-bound	floating-point-number

	The default upper bound for histogram latencies, in seconds, is
	specified.

	Specifying this command will enable metrics collection and reporting.

default-histogram-bins		integer-number

	The default number of histogram bins is specified.

	Specifying this command will enable metrics collection and reporting.




Each disk to be tested must be specified via a "disk" statement:

disk	block-device-name raw-device-name

	The block device name must be a disk block device that honors the
	BLKGETSIZE ioctl (size of a partition in 512 byte blocks).

	The raw device name must be the device node associated with the
	specified block device. The association is created with the
	raw command (see "man 8 raw" for complete information).

	A device name that contains embedded whitespace characters may be
	enclosed in double quote characters.

	DOUBLE CHECK YOUR DISK STATEMENTS AND THE RAW DEVICE ASSOCIATIONS
	BEFORE STARTING A TEST (ESPECIALLY IF WRITING IS ENABLED)!

	FOR OPTIMAL OPERATION THERE SHOULD BE ONLY ONE PARTITION 
	(LOGICAL OR PHYSICAL) PER PHYSICAL DISK TESTED.

	I/O LATENCY COLLECTION AND REPORTING MAY BE DIFFICULT TO
	INTERPRET WHEN MORE THAN ONE THREAD PER DISK IS SPECIFIED.




A "disk" statement may be followed by options specific to that disk.
Options are specified by following the "disk" statement with a line
containing an open brace, one or more lines containing individual options
and finally a line containing a close brace.

The option statements are:

block-size		integer-block-size-bytes

	The I/O block size for this disk is specified.

read-fraction		floating-point-number

	The read fraction for this disk is specified.

starting-block		integer-block-number

	The test area starting block number for this disk is specified.

test-area-size		integer-block-number

	The test area size (in blocks) for this disk is specified.

requests-per-thread	integer-number

	The number of I/O operations per test thread for the disk is
	specified.

threads-per-disk	integer-number

	The number of test threads per disk for this disk is specified.

access-pattern		random or sequential

	The test access pattern for this disk is specified.

write-verification	enabled or disabled

	The write verification state for this disk is specified.

histogram-upper-bound	floating-point-number

	The upper bound for histogram latencies, in seconds, for this
	disk is specified.

	Specifying this command will enable metrics collection and
	reporting for this disk.

histogram-bins		integer-number

	The number of histogram bins for this disk is specified.

	Specifying this command will enable metrics collection and
	reporting for this disk.

The '#' is the comment character. All characters starting with the '#'
through the end of the line are treated as a comment.





Here is an example control file designed to create the maximum DMA stress
on the test system.

default-access-pattern		sequential
default-block-size		64K
default-requests-per-thread	100000

disk	block raw	# multiple disk statements as necessary

Here is another example control file that runs random tests on all of the
disks save one. Disks 1 and 3 inherit the default parameters and disk
2 overrides some of the defaults.

default-block-size		8K
default-threads-per-disk	3
default-read-fraction		0.65

disk block1 raw1

disk block2 raw2
{
	access-pattern		sequential
	threads-per-disk	1
	requests-per-thread	100000
	write-verification	enabled
}

disk block3 raw3

